Fromm. Hanselman is.com. It's
Hanselman it's. Are we doing
discussion with web developer and
technologists? Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 46. Recorded Wednesday,
January 9th, 2007. Support for Hanselman it's
just provided by COVID Smith
tools. Makers of coach Smith.
An extensible template base code
generator for.net has limits listeners
get $100 off code Smith
professional with coupon code H
M 100. online@covidsmithtools.com. Support is
also provided by dotnet developers
journal. The world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott and Carl discuss
the functionality and requirements for
WP F E windows presentation
foundation. Hi, this is Carl Franklin.
You're listening to Hanselman it's
once again. It's good to
be with you, Scott Hanselman.
How are you? I'm well,
how are you, sir? I'm
just fine. And this week
here, you might sound a
little froggy. Yeah, I got
a little Barry white going
right now. I'm about to
walk to his low. Yeah.
Got a few extra white
blood cells in your body.
I don't know what's going
on. I was at the,
I was at the hospital
today. I'm trying to figure
out if it was malaria
or not, the doctor doesn't
think it is. I thought
it might be stomach worms,
something that you would pick
up in Africa, but the,
the current current thinking is
that it's a bad teriyaki.
That could be, you never
know. I've been laid out
by bad teriyaki, nearly every
time the chicken I'll get
ya. So we're talking this
week about WP F E
w PFE. That's the code
name? A windows presentation foundation
everywhere. Otherwise known colloquially among
devs as the flash killer.
Although Microsoft doesn't like it.
When we say that you,
they don't like it, but
you know whether it's true
or not, we'll discover in
our talk today. Won't we?
Yeah, I have him. I
have a metric crap load
of links. This, this week
we saw a little light
on the links lately, but
if we, if we don't
get to some of them,
they'll all be listed on
the website. Okay. Now, have
you done any XAML work
yourself? You know, XAML work
is funny. The whole idea
of XAML is that we
shouldn't have to write it,
but I understand it fully.
In fact, you know, I
was very happy when, you
know, we were looking at
forms described as XML. I
had been doing that kind
of thing programming wise for,
for years, even when HTML
was, was just fairly new.
So, so it's an, it's
a good idea whose time
has come. But as far
as like rolling up my
sleeves and writing XAML no,
I don't. I hope I
never have to do that.
Yeah. It's really interesting. It's
it a good idea whose
time Has come or a
good idea? Who's time has
returned, you know, it wasn't
it just 10 years ago
when I was writing C
and C plus plus using
a MFC and we would
make our resource files be
separate from our code and
have used the class wizard
to hook them up. Right.
Is, you know, is this
just that with angle brackets?
I don't know. I do
know this, that the XAML
and the underlying markup idea,
the technology behind it is
a solid, and I think
it's a fantastic idea. Great
idea. We, you know, we
had this idea when I
saw prodigy, you know, the
very first time that we
were thinking of sending vectors
over modems, instead of bitmaps.
I mean, it's that whole
idea of, I want to
just send you a form
and have you render it
and you know, that's why
the browser is such a
big deal. And that's the
same principle of the browser
works. We're trying to get
those Pentium fours and core
two duals to do a
little work. Exactly. Here's the
thing. And we won't get
too into the politics of
it, but where I think
Microsoft is dropping the ball
is the Microsoft expression tools
you can read about them
at shrink.com/l for J they've
got this expression designer. This
was a, an evolution of
a tool that they bought
from another company. And now
they've broken it up. Now,
if I understand correctly, there's
a web skew, a blend
skew, B L E N
D blend, design, skew, and
immediate skew. I've read the
directions three times and I'm
still not clear, which one
of these works. The reason
that Photoshop is awesome is
that there's two versions, right?
There's Photoshop. And then there's
like Photoshop se which special
edition, which everyone always realizes
is crippled edition. So there's
basically the free crappy version
you get. And then there's
the $500 version. If there
were eight different versions of
Photoshop, I don't think Photoshop
would be as ubiquitous. And
just as I was very
frustrated when visual studio team
system had half a dozen
different skews for testers and
architects and developers, and you
couldn't just buy the ultimate
skew, right? Vista's got what
seven now, seven skews, home,
home business, you know, home
premium home, basic business. At
least they have an ultimate
skew, right? The, everything in
the kitchen sink skew, right.
I just don't understand expression.
And then if I, you
can correct me if I'm
wrong here, but the MSDN
universal license does not currently
include expression. That's correct. Yeah.
So How are we supposed
to make this technology ubiquitous
and amazing if we're not
going to give people the,
the tools to develop, you
know, w with right now
you can get the CDPs
for free, but eventually you're
gonna have to start paying
Well. And I mean, I
can imagine all of our,
our, you know, paying listeners
out there who are used
to paying for everything saying
when, when, when you guys
are just upset, because you're
not getting some free software
from Microsoft, I disagree. I
think our paying listeners, if
they're smart, they've paid for
a universal license for developer,
not for production, but for
a developer. It's the smartest
thing you can do. You
show up at your new
job and, Oh, you have
a universal here's your license.
Yeah. Really agree. I, I,
I don't know why it's
not in the box. I
mean, maybe it's that they're
financially strapped and they think
this could be a big
thing, but unfortunately, you know,
that's a bean counter mentality,
exact things don't get big
by them, you know, just
being great. They also, they
also have to be accessible.
Well, that's enough politics that
I have my opinion and
I've expressed it. You've got
yours. Let's talk about the
underlying technology. Cause I think
that's what people want to
hear. Okay. And by the,
by the way, the regional
directors are on our side.
So we're, if we have
any influence at all, maybe
Microsoft will come around. Yeah.
I mean, it's, it's possible.
I think that blogs people,
you know, everyone who's out
there, whether they're a MVP
or not, if you blog
about it, you express your
opinion, you know, in a
civil way, as opposed to
starting a flame war. I
think all of that adds
up and you've got to
give people like, you know,
Scott Guthrie credit, this is a
guy who writes his own
blog. You know, he doesn't
have an assistant writing his
blog, right. He writes his
own samples. He reads in
response to his comments. And
if you make a reasoned
argument, you know, things will
change. And there are people
at Microsoft at very high
levels who have the power
to make, make change. So
I got to give him
credit for that. All right.
WPF, not WPF, but WPF.
Right? This is windows presentation
foundation, right? Codename, Avalon. This
is a gdi.next it's the
new rendering engine. You can
get it by downloading the.net
framework three. Oh, which includes
also of course, Indigo, which
is when windows communication foundation
and the first really awesome
application that I think we
talked about on the show
a couple of weeks ago,
or a couple of months
ago was the, the New York
times application, right? This was
the New York times reader app.
It's basically a super blog
reader, except the only blog
it reads is the New York
times, but an amazing presentation.
It shows off the rendering,
the Nia, seeing the new
font stuff, the have flowed
text controls through, through columns,
all of the things that
made life hard under GDI
made simpler. And that was
kind of a showcase application
from the New York times. Yeah.
Now WPF requires, of course
which itself requires Dutton
to, Oh, so for your
mom, that's kind of a
significant thing to get set
up on her machine Is
starting at three O going
to be going to make
it into windows update as
a recommended update or, or
an optional update. The word
on the street is that
it's still optional, but I
could be wrong. I did
notice I was, you know,
I was in Tanzania and
I needed to update. I,
so this is an interesting
point about who out there
is going to be able
to get these things. I've
got two anecdotes. First one
I'm in Tanzania on a
9,600 baud dial up and
I want to get done
and framework to Oh, on
the thing. So I can
show some of the kids
over there, how to program.
I want to, I just
want to get them hello
world. I wasn't even gonna
download express. I was gonna
download sharp develop, right? Just
a very basic IDE. Right?
So to do this, I
got to get done at
two on the box. Well,
in order to get these
things on the box, I
needed like six, this is
on a windows, 2000 server
running service pack three. I
needed to get 2000 service
pack four. I had to
get 69 different security updates,
which took three days a
while running the modem all
night long. I had to
use tools like get right
to get the, the stuff
I needed. I had install
all of these just to
get I E just to
get done at two O
same thing happened recently with
a person who gave me
a laptop to give to
the kids in Africa. I
paved it. I put on
my XP box, my XP
disk, rather, it's not a
slipstream disc. It's just whatever
the skew I have is.
Right. And it took five
reboots and five visits to
windows update just to get
the things that would allow
me to get  on
the box. Yeah. So if
your mom's machine is not
up to date and you
haven't set automatic updates, which
you should, you're going to
have a little challenge or
she will have a little
challenge trying to get those
prerequisites that you need to
get done at three Oh
two on your box. There
really isn't any other way
to do it other than
a download the updates. Right.
I mean, as there is,
does MSDN universal come with
some sort of Microsoft windows
updates It's list a that
you can insert Well from
DVD. That's a really interesting
point. I found myself wishing
for the windows update disc,
and I hope someone hears
us and works on that
because the problem I was
happening having was that the,
the wireless connection, the 9,600
baud CDMA cell phone connection
I was using was so
unreliable that windows update with
timeout and he could retrying
and retrying and retrying. Yeah.
If I could go in
and get the we'll, remember
that they've passed out CDs
of a windows service pack
to XP service pack two.
That was great. I carry
that around with me at
Christmas time and went to
all the family's houses. You
know, you could have you
go to Thanksgiving and you
say, Hey, you got a
laptop in the back. Let
me update it for you.
Right. Okay. So the point
is that for a corporate
application, for something that you
control deployment windows, dotnet three
O a framework is probably
something that's within your ability
for those people who are,
have their machines running automatic
updates, it'll be a no
brainer, but what if you
want to get WPF XAML
based rich media experience. You
want the flexibility of an
XML based presentation layer, but
you don't want all of
the, the Schmidt's on your
box. Right? So WPF is
fantastic. It is a one,
Meg might be a little
bigger when it gets down.
It's a one Meg download
just like flash or shockwave
that you download when you
hit a page. And it,
it does not have any
prerequisites on the dominant framework.
Now, current versions don't have
real rich, he sharp support
and framework is CLR support,
but future versions will It's.
Well it's because it has
a micro framework in it.
Right? Right. Exactly. It's a
tiny dot and framework of
its own. It's a tiny
render. It's basically tiny versions
of all these things that
you, that you would need
packaged up into one tiny,
tiny download one while tiny
for us. One Meg, I
think on a, on a
dial up that would probably
take you about 10, 15
minutes. Yeah. That's not bad,
but they're talking about adding,
you know, much more support
for the base class library.
Cause they have to do
a subset of the library,
right? They, they can't give
you the entire dotnet framework.
Right. But they want to
give you enough where you've
got a rich enough environment
where you can build some
interactivity into your, into your
system. Now they just released
the December, 2006, CTP the community
technology preview. And to show
that they're serious, there is
both a windows and Mac
version. This is very cool.
So the window, yeah. The
windows version, is it shrink,
stir.com/l four C and the
Mac version as it shrinks
or.com/ . And of course,
being that I have a
Mac and a PC sitting
next to each other on
my desk, I can attest
that they work nicely together
and you can download a
bunch of samples that shrink
store slash L four B,
that includes a bunch of
the stuff you can unzip
and play with. And you
have to get the documentation
separately. That's at shrink slash
L four D as in
David, the samples are at
L four B. Yeah. So
I think the fact that
it works on the Mac,
and I can only assume
that there's going to be
a, a, a Linux version
out there as, and the
windows version works on both
IE and Firefox works in
Firefox one, five and two.
Oh. And there's an actually
a really interesting article on
getting started with WPF. It's
shrink, stir.com/l four L this
is an MSDN article. And
about halfway down, there's a
section on exactly what works
and what doesn't and Firefox
right now, when you visit
a page that uses WP
F Slash E, it will
be Prompt you to go
and look in the Firefox
plugin finder directory. And because
WPF slash E is not
a, a published official helper
yet, right. It's not a
real application. It's paid up.
It doesn't actually get listed,
but you can go in
and manually install it. And
it works just fine and
Firefox. So when it eventually
comes out, the experience that
someone gets, whether they're using
IE or Firefox is going
to be really smooth. It's
just going to be like
getting flashed. They're just going
to show up, click a
couple of things. You know,
we want two clicks. They
don't have to go through
a big installer. I just
went next, next finish. And
it was, it was taken
care of. So the thing
is, you've got to, you
got to see these, these
samples. You have to see
some samples to really understand
how clean this has. I
think one of the nicest
samples that I saw was
a guy called the rogue.
His website is kind of
a dodgy, but he's got
some nice samples@shrinksor.com slash L
for R. He's got like
an all black website with
flashy, animated gifs and stuff.
But he's got a lot
of good information about wind
effects. And as a banker
type, I'm always looking for
things that are going to
move banking and online finance
to the next level. The
Woodgrove finance application was written
by a lady whose blog
is called scorps.com. I don't
think I shrink derived that
S C O R B
s.com. And she worked on
an application called the Woodgrove
finance application. And just last
month, they released the source
code of this app at
shrink.com/ . And this application
was a basically takes over
your browser. And this is
an what's called an XB,
a P and X pap.
It's an XML browser-based application.
And this is going to
be a little confusing to
people until Microsoft has some
positioning on this, because there's
a couple of different ways
you can use WPF, right?
And you can compile an
application. I could give you
an exe. And if you
have dotnet three on your
box, you can use it
like the times like the
New York times reader, then I
could make an X bap,
a browser based XML XAML
based application. It would have
an X bap X VAP
extension. And I would just
visit that Earl. And it
would actually show up and
fill up the browser. There'd
be no HTML involved. The
would grow finance application is
like that. And then the
WP F E stuff is
more like flash. It's really
focused on living in an
asp.net page. It's not meant
to be a whole new
application or a whole new
kind of application all by
itself. It could, but it's
really about adding interactivity, like
a really great example of
kind of a web 2.0
interactivity would be the Google
finance page. I'm sure you've
probably seen that you visit
finance.google.com enter in anything. And
this is a really great
chart and it really fits
in to the current, the
current layout and the flow.
But then you realize that
the chart has interactivity with
the HTML and vice versa.
So for example, they'll show
a chart of your running
stock price with letters pointing
to points of interest on
the actual chart. So they
might see, you might see
a peak where you went
to four bucks and you
have a letter a, there
you click on the letter
a and then they'll actually
find the press release that
was released that day. And
then draw a correlation between
the two. This is a
flash based application, but the
flash app is communicating with
the Ajax aspect of the,
of the application. So if
you already got an AI,
an Ajax, asp.net application, you
could enable aspects of it
that would have been difficult
in Ajax with WPF might
be Richard charting might be
a dropdown combo that, you
know, works the way you
want it to work. Another
good example would be Nickeel.
Kotara is a flicker photo
viewer@shrinkstir.com slash L four H.
And McKeel is brilliant, brilliant
asp.net guy. And I'm a
huge fan. He has a
thing called script sharp, and
you can see it at
shrinks.com/l for G. And he's
been starting to apply this
to WPF and script sharp
is a way to write
C-sharp if you're a C
sharp programmer and get JavaScript,
he is extending that. So
one could write C-sharp and
get XAML kind of sounds
silly, but the idea is
if you're really good at
expressing your intent in one
language, stick with it, right,
and he'll handle the generation.
So he's got a really
great example of the flicker
photo viewer, but basically you
visit that site at shrinks.com/l
four H type in a
tag, a flicker tag, and
then he'll pull using the
Jason J S O N
JavaScript object notation, Jason kind
of web services API that's
exposed by flicker and pull
down images and then bring
them into the WPF space
and show you an animated
slideshow. And that slideshow will
include reflections and translucency and
all of the things that
you're used to seeing on
WPF application really, really slick
stuff. And actually, there's another
one that is written@ashrinkstir.com slash
L four S it's basically
kind of a rewrite of
the virtual earth application, but
it's done in WPF. Now,
this is just a, a
big a start, but you
know, if you go to
mics, Oh seven, right mixes,
the, the web interactivity conference
that is hosted by Microsoft,
but not run by Microsoft,
right? It's gonna be in
Vegas this year. There's going
to be a lot of
stuff on WPF. There is
an announcement up at Scott
Guthrie's blog at shrinks.com/l for
N, where he announces the
CTP. Any kind of gives
some, some hints, some, you
know, a harbinger of what's
to come. And the impression
that I get is that
in the first half of
2007, they're going to want
to have Firefox on windows,
on XPN up, and then
they're going to have Mac
and possibly Linux. And then
they're going to have a
limited CLR within that working
and already bigger companies are
starting to pick that up.
If you take a look@shrinkstir.com
slash L four Oh, Yahoo
is actually rewriting the Yahoo
messenger using windows presentation foundation.
Now they're not using the
WPF III stuff, which again,
I think is going to
cause some confusion because there's
these different levels of, of
requirements. I think the same
thing happened with shockwave and
flash. Don't you think? Yeah,
there was a time where
it's like, well, do I
need flash, which is easy
and small, or do I
need shockwave, which is a
bigger deal to install. You
know, what can happen here?
If WP Effie gets some
real popularity, is that people
will be willing to download
and install WP F you
know, because that's where all
the cool stuff is happening.
But when you go to
a click once application, that
requires the entire framework. Oh
my God. Why, why should
I do that? Yeah, I
think you totally nailed it.
I think you nailed it.
A couple other blogs to
check out Mike harsh, one
of the PM's and shrinks
her slash L for K.
Again, all of these links
are going to be up
on the Hansel minutes site,
including two really great channel
nine videos. One with Mike
harsh at shrink stir slash
L for E, and one
with the lead PM chose
Stegman at shrink stir slash
L for F. And there's
also a WPF blog at
shrink her slash L four
P. I think that WPF
E is for my mom,
for the public, going to
be a more interesting thing
than WPF proper. I think
we'll, we'll see applications written
in WPF for, for the
back office for intranets, but
I can really see myself
making a pretty amazing banking
application, a better experience with,
with WPOV. Now we should
talk about this versus flash
because a lot of people
say, well, this is just
Microsoft, Pete non flash. What's
the point? Sure. This is,
you know, arguably, this is
their offering in that space.
This is what they want
to compete with flash with.
And I think you'd probably
agree with me when I
say that, frankly, I don't
understand why flash didn't take
off. You know, I've seen
some amazing didn't take off.
I thought it was like
one of the most popular
plugins for, for browsers in
all history. Well, let me,
let me, let me rephrase,
not take off in the,
you know, cutesy ad cutesy
game kind of sense, but
in the why people didn't
write entire applications on flash.
Ah, I mean, we were
here. We are here. We
are. Futsing with Ajax, right?
We're putting together angle brackets
and bailing wire. We're fighting
with JavaScripts and Dom's, and
there's, you know, 20 different,
well, hell more than 20,
probably 50 by now, different
Ajax frameworks where people want
to string together this stuff.
But here we've got flash
that is cross-platform runs on
Linux runs on Mac runs
on windows. Why aren't we
willing to write an application
that fills up the browser
and runs everything is flash.
I can, I have my
ideas? I don't know if
I'm sure you do, please
share pretty much what hits
me right away is a
development. You know, it is
confusing. That is the development
for flash is limited. I
mean, it's, you, you use
action script. There's stuff that
you can, and you can't
do. Is it action script
now or lingo? Well, before
it been ad spin action
script for many years, but
wow. I'm getting old. Then
I remember when it was
future wave. Remember that future
wave technologies and it was
called future splash. Yeah. I'm
getting old, but yeah, it's
it's you have to use
their tools, their language, and
it speaks a binary thing.
But now arguably with Microsoft,
you have to use quote
unquote, their tools, their language.
But interestingly, you've got Adobe
coming up with XAML exporters'
where you can load something
up into illustrator and go
file save as, and XAML
pops out. Yeah. Why is
it that you can spit
out? XAML so easily and
people were so quick to
jump on the bandwagon, but
I don't know. Can you
go into illustrator and then
export a Swift file? A
flash file? A I don't
know. I don't even live
in that space. Yeah. I
don't either. Which is kind
of a nice thing, which
gets into what you were
talking about before with the,
the way that developer flow
should work. Like at Karelian,
you know, we do a
finance, we have a full
time interaction designer, right. And
she manages user interface and
experience for the, for all
the applications. I would love
it if she had a
bunch of designers under her
writing the UI, and I'll
worry about the, the inner
workings and plug them into
each other. Right. And if
she wants to do it
in Excel, you know, Microsoft
expression, or if he wants
to do it in illustrator,
I don't really care. Yeah.
Interesting. We'll have to wait
and see what happens with
that. I'm very curious as
to how it's gonna play
out. Yeah. Right now, I
just want to make it
easy for me to get
into it and play with
it within visual studio, 2005.
Cause that's kinda where I
live. So Sean Burke has made
a toolkit, extender, a trickster.com/
that once you have
the SDK installed, you do
have to do a little
bit of manual installation with
small zipping of files into
your visual studio directory. But
this allows you to drag
A WPF fee Components onto
your under your Desktop. But
I think that the, the,
the summary that we want
to leave people with is
just kind of a reminder
about what the difference are
between these different things. So
dotnet three O, which was
previously when effects. This is
Avalon Indigo. Now WPF WCF,
the dutton@threeorequiresthe.net framework to Oh,
right. So once you have
those two things on your
system, you can run windows,
presentation, foundation applications that are
compiled. You can run them
that, or click once, or
you can run X, PA
X, BAPS, XB, AP XML,
XAML based browser applications. These
are with an X bap
extension. All those you can
run when you have gotten
a three, Oh, you get
all of  functionality, you
get all of WPF and
the applications, including like ex-pat,
they live in a sandbox,
right? It's like a active
X document. They're running inside
the context of it. Now
those only work on windows
server, 2003 Vista and XP.
And they're not cross-platform. So
when FX is not cross
platform, Carlos WPOV is cross
platform with a very small
subset of the three O
stuff. They live in the
browser, just like the
except they're cross platform. And
they do not have access
to the, the, the entire
dotnet framework. They have a
very, very small subset. Now,
at some point, WP Effie
I'm sure will, will live
outside of the browser. You'll
be able to use it
in a WinForms application as
a, as a component. And
we'll see, I think we'll
see more and more sharing
of componentry as people, right?
Shims that let you talk
back and forth. But right
now, the WPF stuff, you
can talk to it via
JavaScript very, very easily. So
there's an object model. You
can pull information in and
out of WPP. So if
you've already made some investment
in Ajax, but there's perhaps
some aspect of your application
that you weren't really satisfied
with, WPOV could potentially add
that level of rich interactivity
to your existing site, without
you having to change a
lot of stuff, you can
still call web services or
Jason applications from your WPF
components. So I think you
would look at it, something
that would augment your strategy
as opposed to causing you
to shift your strategy entirely
in a different direction. Scott,
are we going to see
support for WP Effie in
visual studio 2005? Or are
we going to have to
wait for ? Yeah. So
you actually can do this
in 2005. Now you do
need to get the web
applications, project support. So you
have to go to shrink
stir.com/l for M M as
in mom. Once you have
that support, you can get
the getting started stuff under
shrink star slash L four
L. Once you get the
getting started, stuff installed, you
have the, the SDK, the
docs and the runtime for
WPF, remembering that your end
users only need the runtime.
There's some project types that
you have to go and
manually install. You unzip them
into your visual studio project
types folder. And that will
let you go file new
and actually say WPF application
from within visual studio 2005.
Okay. And then of course
your XAML can be written
in any application. You can
get trials of expression, the
expression stuff can be downloaded
at a shrinker slash L
for J, or you can
use any tool that will
export XAML and actually be
enough. People are excited about
XAML. There's lots of conversion
tools. So if you have
some SVG, scalable vector graphics
code out there, or even
some, some old fashioned windows
Mehta files, you can get
those converted into XAML fairly
easily, which can take existing
applications that are vector based
and move them into this,
this realm in a fairly
painless way. Okay. Sounds like
a show. Okay. Yeah. You
know, I, there's so much
stuff to look into about
this. I could talk even
more about it and maybe
we'll do another show sometime
and talk more about the
samples and writing your first
application. Well, I think we're
going to have a lot
more interest once we get
out of, you know, CTP
land and some shipping Code.
Yeah. I think definitely that
the first half of 2007
is going to be really,
really interesting if they, if
they hit their schedule on
WP IFE. And if some
of the speculation out there
about possible Linux support, better
support for C-sharp and the
CLR, if those things come
to pass, it's gonna look
great for everybody. Awesome. Scott,
thanks a lot for being
sick and doing the show.
I hope it was not
too hard to listen to
me. No, not at all.
And we'll see you next
week on Hanselman.